h1. SIMPLY SCALA SERVER

This project provides a fast & ultra-lightweight http server (with "simpleframework":http://www.simpleframework.org/)
with an API dedicated to define server's routes (request-response), start & stop server.

This works in a Java 6+ environment

The actual project release version is "0.4":http://search.maven.org/#search|ga|1|simplyscala-server

Be careful ! Between 0.2 & 0.3 version :
    * signature of ServerResponse was change(ServerResponse => StaticServerResponse & DynamicServerResponse). It is not retro-compatible !
    * you can't use String to type your content-type response but fr.simply.util.ContentType builder or some fr.simply.util._ objects

Be careful ! Between 0.3 & 0.4 version :
   * 0.4 version works under scala 2.10.x & don't support 2.9.x version anymore

This project is under test. See test code coverage report "here":http://simplyscala.github.com/simplyscala-server/

h2. Roadmap

* %{color:green;padding-right:164px}custom server's default response%                  %{color:green;font-weight:bold}OK%
* %{color:green;padding-right:225px}GET request with params%                           %{color:green;font-weight:bold}OK%
* %{color:green;padding-right:155px}use * pattern for path route param%                %{color:green;font-weight:bold}OK%
* %{color:green;padding-right:100px}check if chosen port was not already used%         %{color:green;font-weight:bold}OK%
* %{color:green;padding-right:312px}POST request%                                      %{color:green;font-weight:bold}OK%
* %{color:green;padding-right:285px}cross compilation%                                 %{color:green;font-weight:bold}OK%
* push on maven central repository                                                     OK
* Dynamic ServerResponse                                                               OK
* build in scala 2.10                                                                  OK
* Stub Server Fixture Trait                                                            OK

* PUT request                                                                          WIP
* HEAD request                                                                         WIP
* DELETE request                                                                       WIP
* OTPIONS, PATCH request                                                               WIP
* set response headers                                                                 WIP

* %{color:orange;padding-right:330px}Java API%                                         TODO
* extends simplyscala-server                                                           TODO

h2. Installation

h3. Git repo

simplyscala-server is a SBT project.
It use 0.12 sbt version.

h3. Maven dependency

<pre><code>
    <dependency>
        <groupId>com.github.simplyscala</groupId>
        <artifactId>simplyscala-server_2.10</artifactId>
        <version>0.4</version>
    </dependency>
</code></pre>

h3. SBT dependency

<pre><code>
    libraryDependencies += "com.github.simplyscala" %% "simplyscala-server" % "0.4"
</code></pre>

    Only the following Scala versions 2.10.x are currently supported.

h4. Play! specific dependency management

In your play! project Build file :

<pre><code>
    object ApplicationBuild extends Build {

        val appDependencies = Seq (
            "com.github.simplyscala" %% "simplyscala-server" % "0.4"
        )
    }
</code></pre>

h3. Simple JAR file

"0.4 jar version":https://oss.sonatype.org/content/repositories/releases/com/github/simplyscala/simplyscala-server_2.10/0.4/simplyscala-server_2.10-0.4.jar

h3. Try SNAPSHOT version

You could be tempted to try SNAPSHOT version to test project's next features.

h4. with Maven

<pre><code>
<project ...>

   <repositories>
      <repository>
         <id>maven snapshot</id>
         <url>https://oss.sonatype.org/content/repositories/snapshots</url>
      </repository>
   </repositories>

   ...

   <dependency>
      <groupId>com.github.simplyscala</groupId>
      <artifactId>simplyscala-server_2.10</artifactId>
      <version>0.5-SNAPSHOT</version>
    </dependency>
</code></pre>

h4. with SBT

<pre><code>
   resolvers += "Sonatype OSS Snapshots" at "https://oss.sonatype.org/content/repositories/snapshots"

   libraryDependencies += "com.github.simplyscala" %% "simplyscala-server" % "0.5-SNAPSHOT"
</code></pre>

h2. Usage

In order to use SimplyScala server API, import as follows:

<code>import fr.simply._</code>

h3. Basic Usage

<pre>
<code>
    val server = new StubServer(8080).start
    server.stop
</code>
</pre>

By default, with no routes defined, SimplyScala server returns a 404 text/plain response with "error" in body

h3. Server's custom default response

You can define your own server's default response like this :

<code>
    val server = new StubServer(8080).defaultResponse(ContentType("text/plain"), "value return in body", 400).start
</code>

h3. Build GET request routes with param

<pre>
<code>
    val route = GET (
        path = "/test",
        params = Map("param1" -> "toto"),
        response = StaticServerResponse(ContentType("text/plain"), "yo", 200)
    )

    val server = new StubServer(8080, route).start
</code>
</pre>

when you request <code>http://localhost:8080/test?param1=toto</code>, the server returns with an http code 200 and a "text/plain"-typed body containing "yo".

h3. Build POST request route with param

<pre>
<code>
    val route = POST (
        path = "/test",
        params = Map("param1" -> "toto"),
        response = StaticServerResponse(ContentType("text/plain"), "yo", 200)
    )

    val server = new StubServer(8080, route).start
</code>
</pre>

h3. Build request with dynamic server response

Since 0.3 version, you able to define some dynamic server response.
To do that, you must define function typed as Request => StaticServerResponse, which permit use some parameters of the
server request to build a response.

<pre>
<code>
    import org.simpleframework.http.Request
    ...

    val dynamicResponse: Request => StaticServerResponse = {
        request =>
            println("I use dynamic code !!!")
            StaticServerResponse(Text_Plain, "OK dynamic", 200)
        }

    val route = GET (
        path = "/test",
        params = Map("param1" -> "toto"),
        response = DynamicServerResponse(dynamicResponse)
    )

    val server = new StubServer(8080, route).start
</code>
</pre>

h3. What to do when the configured port is already used ?

Before creating the server instance, SimplyScala checks if the port you defined is not already in use.
If it is the case, SimplyScala will try the next value (+1) port to start the server.
You can retrieve the effective port like this:

<pre>
<code>
    val server = new StubServer(8080).start
    server.portInUse    // perhaps 8081
</code>
</pre>

h3. ContentType util

with fr.simply.util._ import you can use some utilities to declare server's content type

<pre>
<code>
    val route = GET (
        path = "/test",
        params = Map("param1" -> "toto"),
        response = StaticServerResponse(Text_Plain, "yo", 200)
    )

    val server = new StubServer(8080, route).start
</code>
</pre>

if we don't have the needed content type util you can use <code>ContentType("your content type")</code>

h2. Uses in test context

h3. Simple usage in test context

simplyscala-server is particularly useful in unit test context.
You can use it like that with "ScalaTest":http://www.scalatest.org/ :

<pre>
<code>
    class StubServerTest extends FunSuite {

        test("a test which needed simplyscala-server") {
            val route = GET (
                path = "/test",
                params = Map("param" -> "toto"),
                response = StaticServerResponse(Text_Plain, "yo", 200)
            )

            val server = new StubServer(8080, route).start

            someHttpRequest("http://localhost:%s/test?param=toto".format(server.portInUse))
        }
    }
</code>
</pre>

You you do not have to stop the server thanks to when a define port is already used, simplyscala-server start server with next port and return reference to it via portInUse method.

h3. using fixture to manipulate immutable server reference (in 0.4 version)

If you want to stop the server & stay immutable, you can use StubServerFixtureTrait like that

<pre>
<code>

import org.scalatest.FunSuite
import fr.simply.{StaticServerResponse, GET}
import fr.simply.util.Text_Plain
import fr.simply.fixture.StubServerFixture

    class StubServerFixtureTest extends FunSuite with StubServerFixture {

        test("test stub server fixture") {
            val route = GET (
                path = "/test",
                params = Map("param1" -> "toto"),
                response = StaticServerResponse(Text_Plain, "yo", 200)
            )

            withStubServerFixture(8080, route) { server =>
                // you can continue your test with server reference
                // in this fixture your server stub is started
                // at the en d of this fixture your server is stopped
            }
        }
    }
</code>
</pre>

"ScalaTestFixture":http://www.scalatest.org/user_guide/sharing_fixtures

h3. adding values in server response's header (in 0.5 version)

You might need manage server response header, for example in the case of HEAD response.

<pre>
<code>

import org.scalatest.FunSuite
import fr.simply.{StaticServerResponse, HEAD}
import fr.simply.util.Text_Plain
import fr.simply.fixture.StubServerFixture

    class StubServerFixtureTest extends FunSuite with StubServerFixture {

        test("test stub server fixture") {
            val route = HEAD (
                path = "/test",
                response = StaticServerResponse(Text_Plain, "", 200, Map("headerName" -> "value"))
            )

            withStubServerFixture(8080, route) { server =>
                // the server will have key-value pair "headerName" -> "value" in header response
            }
        }
    }
</code>
</pre>

h5. footpage

This file is written with .textile extension
* http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Textile_%28markup_language%29
* http://textile.sitemonks.com
* http://redcloth.org/hobix.com/textile/

"Maven Repository Usage Guide":https://docs.sonatype.org/display/Repository/Sonatype+OSS+Maven+Repository+Usage+Guide
"Sonatype project JIRA Page":https://issues.sonatype.org/browse/OSSRH-5163
